Notice at the northern part of california we have a divergent plate boundary or an offshore seafloor spreading center where new oceanic crust forms and then is pushed away. In this region of rifting and thin crust mantle rock is melting and rising beneath the surface just like what happens at seafloor spreading divergent plate boundaries. Where plate with an oceanic crust leading edge collides with a plate with continental crust on the edge. The western continental margin of north america was a large long subduction zone with associated volcanoes and terrain accretion. This long transform boundary that connects these two sections of ocean ridge is known as the san andreas fault system. During that time ocean crust was carried into the subduction zones and portions of what it carried were scraped off and attached to the edge of the continent. Let's leave this unique volcanic region and return to the remnants of the ancient subduction zone volcanoes now exposed as granite in the central and western sierras. The magnitude 6.9 earthquake caused significant shaking and damage from santa cruz to san francisco as it released built up stress related to the transform plate motion. We can image the crust under north america and see evidence of the old plate still subducting. All the way south to the sea of cortez where it connects with the seafloor spreading centers that are separating the baja peninsula from the rest of mexico. Prior to the collision of a mid-ocean ridge with the subduction zones there were hundreds of millions of years of active subduction. As a result of the transform motion sections of the southern sierra nevada granite were separated from their origination spot and carried northwards. The long valley caldera is a giant crater left behind after one of the largest volcanic eruptions to happen in north america. What made it this way and why are they seafloor spreading center so close to the continent and not in the middle of the ocean. But about 25 million years ago the spreading center began to be overrun. And in california is expressed with the active volcanoes of mount lassen and mount shasta. Mammoth mountain is one volcanic structure found in the middle of this region known collectively as long valley. The last large eruption about 760,000 years ago left bits of ash and pumice strewn across most of the western united states. As the atlantic ocean spread north america was pushed westward. What happens to the sea floor spreading center off of northern california. The resulting volcanoes are completely different in character and cause to subduction zone volcanoes. How does plate tectonics affect life in california or anywhere else for that matter. The most recent eruption in that area was the explosive eruption depicted in this image of mount lassen on may 22nd 1915. If we move along the ridge north we hit this transform boundary. And right above the spot where we suspect the spreading center would now be we have an area of tens. There's still an active magma chamber under the caldera which releases carbon dioxide gases and hot water at numerous locations around the rim. While some of the rock that makes up the santa cruz mountains in the hills of san francisco. Subduction now over the volcanism of the sierra nevada also ended. The crystal stretching has created sub parallel mountains and valleys collectively known as the basin and range. It has been classified as one of the largest volcanic centers in north america. Accreted material can include ocean sediment that got scraped off the top of the subducting plate. As this map shows we have a number of plate boundaries within or near the state. Like all such centers it is offset at regular intervals by transform faults. That then connects to the continuation of the spreading centers a bit west. To answer that let's look at california's current plate tectonic setting. Here along the coast that crust collides with and then sinks under northern california. With a continental crust is being pulled apart. He's actually walking along the remnants of old volcanic cores. The san andreas fault has done a great job of moving rocks around in the state. That produces a convergent plate boundary. And the san andreas fault system began to form. Extending the continent westward in a paper mache style sequence of addition or accretion. So now that we have the basics down for plate tectonics. A trench earthquakes and inland an active chain of volcanoes. This volcanic chain is known as the cascade mountains. Notice what has happened over the past 80 million years. But what happened to that spreading center. If we go back and follow the ridge south we hit another transform. In addition to exposing the eroded underbelly of ancient sierra and volcanism. Collecting a giant magma chamber just under the surface. The most recent eruptions were those that produced phantom crater and the innocrators. We see them today as far north as point raise. As you can see play tectonics has had a huge impact on the past and present landscape of california. It produces many of our major geologic hazards and it has rafted in and combined the very land masses that now make up our state. It's abducted under the north american continent. Mantle melts combined with large amounts of crystal. Empty the magma chamber and the surrounding cross collapsed. Pause now. The roofing activity is also producing a source of new volcanism to the area. What about the rest of the rock around us where did that come from. Those of us who live along its path are familiar with its associated earthquake hazards. Was one of the most recent large earthquakes. Why is the transform so long. 500 to 600 years ago. This one offsets the ridge eastward. Was actually close to the middle of the ocean. If you want to experience some of this granite closer to home.